But actually a lot of people are moving back into the country young people an
amazing number of young people How long the cities continue to grow larger? Well
a lot of them are losing population are they which ones? New York City is losing
New England is using Erie is losing yes, but are they losing population to the
country? Are they losing populations to places like San Diego and Portland and
Boise Idaho? I don't know California is losing population. There are fewer fewer
people coming in now than are leaving it But I mean I know from partly from what
I read and partly from my own observation that old houses for instance in the
country that Were abandoned have been bought and fixed up and people are living
in them quality of life in the in the cities is such that They don't see any
reason why they have to live that way So they're moving out where there's some
clean air and they can have a little garden patch and Everybody's got television
these days and you have an automobile so that you can get about and all these
places are at least in the in the east or within reach of Some center where
there are cultural theaters and stores and one thing in another If that's the
key point I think I'd be very interested to see some statistics on how many
people Are moving to the country within say a radius of a two-hour drive? Of a
large cultural center and there are a lot of how many are moving to the real
country? Way way out say in the wilds of Nevada or Nebraska for that country
that's something else again a lot of people I mean, you know Move to the desert
or someplace like that which is extremely isolated, but I'm speaking now just
What what you generally called me a farming country? My ideal situation would be
to live in a place like Big Sur or Montana But be within easy commuting distance
of New York and London and Los Angeles and San Francisco You need a much smaller
planet yes Or a much more efficient transportation system Yeah, that is what we
really need and I've seen designs for them Trains that go 300 miles per hour and
you never decelerate the engine you accelerate the the cars up to the 300 and
Attach them to the engine and detach them later You got a a large mesh network
of 300 mile per hour chain trains and a smaller mesh network of trains that do a
hundred and And an even smaller mesh of trains that do 30 miles per hour and you
you set up the mesh so that a train is only a five-minute walk from anywhere Now
you map out the the area of the country available to you within an hour of
traveling and even including two five-minute walks It becomes tremendous much
larger than anything available to us in fact that the culture available To a man
who has access to that network Is is a lot greater than the culture available to
a New Yorker Even if the country is spread out with a population density like
Kansas Yeah, I think what we're seeing is not the elimination of cities, but
just a change in their function Right, I think they reached the point of
Megalopolis, I mean they couldn't you know there were there were just too big
and and had to simmer down again
The subject of huge populations and the attending systems needed to service them
brings up a point which science fiction authors Alan Dean Foster Leigh Brackett
and Larry Niven find fascinating It concerns a pollutant and its role in
controlling a powerful natural phenomenon Larry Niven follows it through Anybody
here in favor of heat pollution depending on the recovery system? Yes. Yeah, I'm
kind of in favor of it Tentatively we need to know more But if Mars just went
into an ice age it may be that we just went into an ice age and it's only heat
pollution that is keeping us from the glaciers That's an interesting
possibility. I don't know why it would affect one planet and not not another. I
mean Well Presumably we both circle the same Sun, huh? That's what I mean and
The recent experiments done to detect neutrinos coming from the Sun Have found
far too few it's as if the fusion process inside the Sun has stopped for a while
Now it can be a frightening thought it isn't as if the Sun is going to stop
shining because it isn't as if it could cool off all at once I'm in favor of
good old mother nature being far far greater menace to mankind than man is Are
you I think mankind has been the biggest force for evolution on earth? For a
long time. Oh, yes for evolution but what I mean is that the natural disasters
that have been you know sort of visited upon the globe of or yeah of a As you
were saying if the Sun has cooled down you know this is sort of beyond our
capacity to do if spray cans could wipe out the ozone layer the Volcanoes of the
earth would have wiped out those right layer a lot sooner Niven's law one thing
I think Lester mentioned is that science fiction there was a great deal of talk
about adaptation and I think science fiction is the literature of adaptation as
opposed to say the literature of reaction I you know I agree I think the
important thing about Science fiction right from the beginning is not whether or
not the predictions were accurate in In themselves, but that the predictions
were made which kind of stretched people's minds Some of them absolutely beyond
the point where they you know Their entire life was encompassed by getting up in
the morning and going to work and going to bed at night And they never thought
about anything beyond the you know beyond the next fence post the idea of of
spaceflight the idea of other worlds the idea of other forms of life opening up
all this enormous Possibility and the conception of atomic power and the
conception of Antigravity right anti gravity load the dice yeah, which hasn't
come true yet, but it who knows and I notice that they're even talking about the
FTL drive as So it might just be possible both of these seem unlikely, you know
well Yes, they seem unlikely what I'm driving at is that it got people thinking
which I think is a lot more important than whether Jules Verne's Submarine the
Nautilus actually could ever have Sailed or not there were submarines before
Jules Verne wrote that book and he didn't even include a periscope Mm-hmm, but
he did have beautifully upholstered no question about that And an organ can't
beat that science fiction writers on a whole tend to be very good interior
decorators Yeah As opposed to the spaceships you see on TV The the big message
through throughout science fiction I've only found one It is there are people
who don't think like you do and they're as right as you are right Yeah, science
fiction was the only thing I read or I can remember reading in high school that
demanded that I think Yeah, yes, there were other stories that made me think but
science fiction was the only thing I read that said now think about this or else
Mm-hmm and uh, it was a wonderful discovery Anyone want to disagree with uh
Lester and Fred's Uh opinion of man's adaptability? I don't myself No, I think
uh man is enormously adaptable and of course I if you want to quibble I I think
Fred's contention was that that man adapted the his environment to suit himself
Well, I suppose in other words you you clobber another animal and take his his
skin rather than growing fur yourself You capture wolves and grow them and grow
them into dogs to protect you instead of attacking you Yes, right So I suppose
that that's true, but that in itself is is pretty much of an adaptability trait
I would think Mm-hmm in the long run. No, I I agree with you in the short run I
worry about something called the tyranny of the minority Uh that our
institutions have developed in such a way that small interest groups can
frustrate any kind of progress Oh, this is true. I'm I was speaking merely of
man on the in the in the in the sort of a primitive state You know in other
words that managed to survive the ice age and survive a lot of other things and
in post-atomic Times or Following I think any natural calamity you're still
going to have a certain number of people left who will in some way Adapt to you
know to whatever they have to do Had you had you given any thought to the
tyranny of the majority? Alan yes, yes, it's kind of hard to think of one
without the other yes And be being in the minority. It's impossible to think of
one without the other I doubt any Mormon has ever forgotten the possibility How
about terraforming Mars? Leigh they keep changing your Mars on you. How about
changing it back, huh? Well, um, I would adore doing that Um, I don't know that
my Mars would be a terribly pleasant place to live either It was pretty chilly
and windy and dusty as I recall it and very much on the ragged edge But the air
could be breathed by strong strong enough people Yes, it was a bit thin, but it
was breathable, which I believe it is actually Not over a long period of time
That is my understanding. I may be wrong on that that But you could get away
without life support All right, there are ways to make a pleasanter Mars. Oh,
yes really there are Terraforming Venus has also got its possibilities I
wouldn't want to bet on that I wouldn't either I'm fascinated by the
possibility, but I don't know I had a character speculating once that what we
need to terraform Venus is a big anti-gravity generator That would send a plume
of the atmosphere out into space to be blown away until we're down to a
breathable atmosphere Well, Carl Sagan's idea was that you seed the atmosphere
with algae Yeah, this seems easier Uh-huh The way he put it, it sounded very,
very practical Yeah, I've seen these plans and sure they look practical, but
what have you got when you finished? A slightly lighter planet with a quite
heavy thick atmosphere under a quite hot sun Uh-huh Nearby sun Uh, Mars sounds
more attractive There obviously has been water on the surface Fluid water Yeah
You've got the abraded water courses and the erosions Arthur Clarke spoke of
igniting a fusion planet on, say, Phobos So that you've got a fairly tiny sun
fairly close in as well as the big sun Uh-huh That would warm up Mars, you'd get
the water melted If you need more, it could possibly be imported from Earth or
from Saturn's rings Uh-huh The, uh, chief, uh, problems always seemed, at least
according to Edgar Rice Burroughs Uh, who, uh, presupposed atmosphere plants, if
you remember Because the, uh, the light, uh, gravity of the planet, uh, uh,
permits a good bit of the atmosphere to leak away into space, doesn't hold it Of
course he was right as far as that goes Yeah, a problem you're always going to
have with you The problem with Mars is nobody ever built the atmosphere plants
yet Right So perhaps we'll get to that anyway Nobody ever seems to mention, uh,
Titan in all of these possible discussions And, uh, I think it's going to be
very interesting when, uh, the, uh, what is it, the latest, not Mariner, but,
um, Explorer shoots by on the, perhaps it is Mariner shoots by after its next
fly-by close-by look at Jupiter And we're supposed to have our first close look
at Titan Uh-huh Which, of course, has, uh, something of an interesting
atmosphere Yes Uh-huh Although it's a bit too far away for comfort Yeah, I never
studied Titan Uh, what's interesting about Titan? Well, that it apparently has
an atmosphere which contains water vapor in it And, uh, a number of other things
which could prove very useful And, uh, the fact is we just don't know very much
about it Uh-huh The mere fact that it has an atmosphere which is not primarily
methane Uh, and that it does have water vapor in it Opens up a whole host of
intriguing possibilities Um, as I recall, Titan is the largest moon in the
system In other words, it's larger than Luna So, it'd be quite habitable if it
were habitable Ganymede is larger than Luna Hmm? Ganymede is larger than Luna
There are a number of moons bigger than, bigger than Luna I didn't know Titan
was the biggest I think so I think so For that matter, there's the possibility
of, uh Well, but you still have the problem of terraforming If you put some
large fusion motors on, on something like, uh Well, on one of the smaller moons
and move them closer to the sun Well, I have every faith in the advance of
technology And because when I first started, see, I'm a lot older than you
people are And when I went to school, the atom was the smallest indivisible
particle of matter Which could never possibly be split And I used to worry a
great deal when I first started writing science fiction Because of the heavy
side layer Which forever prohibited radio communication between Earth and a
spaceship In orbit And all these things seem to have fallen by the wayside Yes
And, uh, sort of today's, um, scientific absolute is tomorrow's, you know Sure
Solved problems So, uh, I, I think ways will be found to do an awful lot of
things And oftentimes, if, if, if the, even just the theory has been propounded
Sometimes you have to wait for the technology to catch up Mm-hmm Even so, it's
not unreasonable to assume that the speed of light barrier can't be cracked No
And you get interesting stories out of that one, too Yes, I, uh, always have
written stories with a lot of action And I like interstellar I like to get out
there and shoot the nebulae And, you know, go into the clusters and all these
things Which, to me, is part of the whole pleasure of writing science fiction
This, uh, series that I'm doing for Ballantyne now Um, I've trot around a good
bit throughout the, uh, galaxy Uh, so, of course, you know, in a story like that
You use faster than light drive simply because I mean, you just, you just say
that it's so And you use it It's not part of, not an integral part of a story
It's merely a means of getting from point A to point B So that you can get on
with your story Because otherwise it would take you several thousand years And
everybody would be, you know, too old when they got there So, but, uh, I notice
that very reputable scientists Are now beginning to challenge the, uh, speed of
light barrier This is certainly true If, uh, if the speed of light can be
cracked We're going to do it eventually It's just too useful a possibility to
ignore Mm-hmm Same statement applies to gravity Antigravity, generated gravity
Some things are, uh, unlikely to be true But very useful if they are That's
right And very often you find the fallout on the way to finding out What, you
know, the, the Sure Testing it Sometimes something happens that's even more
useful than your original Sure The death ray now Has had a lot of fallout We
never dreamed it would be so useful in so many ways When we, when we spoke of
colored beams of light That cut, that would cut through, uh, an enemy Or an
enemy's fortress for that matter That Buck Rogers stuff they used to tell me
when I was a kid Right Ridiculous Well, on, on the whole, uh, you know, we tend
to cling to the things we like in science fiction In the face of scientific
developments unless they've been absolutely disproved Your Mars being a good
example Mm-hmm You were saying, Larry, that, uh, you, you thought the, uh,
science fiction writers Um, nowadays know more than they did then about science
This is true So does the audience Well, of course it's true I, uh, but I mean an
awful lot more is known than, than when we started out Mm-hmm Even the newspaper
reporters are, are brighter Yeah But we made some terrible boo-boos about, uh,
atomic power And what would happen if you started throwing atom bombs around,
you know And we know better now because it's actually happened Yes In those
days, you see, you were, you were dealing with something that, that didn't exist
Yes, I have a hunch someday someone will probably say the same thing about
faster than light drive Oh, I'm sure And anti-gravity Mm-hmm Oddly enough, I
think one of the great advances in technology that we can look for in the next
40, 30 years is going to be in the technology of recovery systems Whether it's
waste heat from atomic plants or paper bags Whatever our recovery systems,
they're going to take energy And practically any form of turning garbage into
something useful requires energy That's why I'm pushing atomic plants Well, I'm
kind of a solar power buff myself All right, the Earth is only getting a certain
amount of solar power If we put up the O'Neill colonies, we will also be able to
put up solar power plants on the Moon And beam the energy back to Earth via
microwaves Aside from that, atomic power is, is the only kind of power that
doesn't originate with sunlight in one form or another That can be used without,
without polluting the atmosphere in one form or another The third choice is to
burn something Anything Oil Yeah, solar power, of course, is, uh Well, there are
other possibilities Solar power originates with the Sun, and fine We can use
anything that originates with the Sun, including running rivers Yes, there are
other possibilities that are waiting for that new technology that hasn't been
discovered yet New Zealand, for example, gets approximately 7% of its electrical
power from thermal sources And there's the possibility Geothermal? Geothermal
There's the possibility of tapping the Earth's heat for artificial geothermal
power And I'm sure there are far more efficient hydroelectric systems than we
have in this country But then we get back to the tyranny of the minority again
And, uh, when is hydroelectric power valuable and when is a wild river valuable?
Yeah Uh, both clean sources of power Yeah, I can name you a clean source of
power It's the temperature difference between the top of an ocean and the bottom
of an ocean And I wouldn't think you would, you would be lousing up the
environment at all if you started, uh, making electrical energy out of that
temperature difference Absolutely But this again, this all requires technology
that hasn't been developed yet to be efficient If we could get fusion that was
good enough, that, that would really be it Uh-huh Yes, fusion would be nice Uh
-huh Fusion would be nice We're dissociating seawater to get oxygen, which is
good Burning the, burning the hydrogen for fusion And, and getting enormous
energy out of it, which is good And the result is helium, which we sell for,
for, uh, dirigibles, right? Right Which is good There are things about the
dirigible that I love And here's one On an airplane, the problem is, uh, people
per volume The closer you pack the people, the more efficient the airplane
becomes But if you do that on a dirigible, it's, it's the mass aboard that
counts I can see a, uh, thin-skinned dirigible Maybe a couple of skins, but both
thin, very thin and very strong And, uh, lightweight floors Say, uh, foam, foam
plastic in spots And, uh, some metal cores to hold them together And you inflate
the whole thing with an oxy-helium mixture And you don't populate just a gondola
underneath You populate the whole dirigible But you, you can't allow, uh,
population density to rise so high So there's endless room throughout this thing
Disneyland in the sky Yeah Can they be made rigid enough to... I don't know All
I know is our building materials get, uh, better and better I know, they're much
better We get closer and closer to bolognium Much better alloys than there, than
there were I remember seeing the Shenandoah, um, when she came out here
Beautiful, beautiful thing Just incredibly beautiful Standing there and watching
her sail over the Santa Bonacus And over the ocean Mm-hmm And, uh, she didn't
last long thereafter And it seemed they all came to rather sad ends Of course,
the Hindenburg saddest of all But, uh, they all seemed to go down in storms Or
break up or something They were used to death Oh, yeah, of course they were You
keep using a dirigible until it breaks up Or it goes down in storms I suspect
that those were the old days Before anyone painted plimsoll lines on ships You
remember what that was for People would take out vast amounts of insurance And
then load their ships to the gunwales And if the ships made port fine If they
didn't, uh, there was a big profit in it No, the plimsoll mark went back a long
time before that Okay I was never that much good at history But the way of
thinking was still there There were no consumer protest groups Well, I'm of the
opinion that, uh, Apropos of what, uh, Fred and Lester were talking about That,
uh, we have, as far as getting out into space One of, one of two choices I mean,
we can either go out And go ahead and keep growing Or else we're going to have
to pull in our ears on this planet Mm-hmm The resources are out there The
resources are out there Just the, the business of living on the Bloomin' thing
For all this length of time I, one of the most horrendous experiences I, I had
Just seeing what time has done to a place Flying down from Baghdad to Basra And
looking down on that land that has been cultivated Under irrigation For six,
seven, eight thousand years And everywhere you look The whole land is white with
a salt scurf And nothing grows on it And there's not a Bloomin' thing you can do
about it Because all during those millennia The chemicals from the irrigation
canals Have been building up in the, uh, in the soil And I see the first hint of
that Beginning down in the Imperial Valley Now when you drive through You see
these areas of white scurf Apparently the water down there is even more saline
And it isn't a matter really of abuse Or, uh, although good Lord knows we have
abused things But, um, the Earth has an enormous capacity to recover
And now new horizons are being explored For mankind's care and survival
Something Leigh Brackett, Alan Dean Foster, Larry Niven Lester Del Rey, Frederik
Pohl And science fiction authors like them Have been doing for years
The Mars that was thought to be very like the Moon Didn't last very long No, it
didn't The next, the next mariner that went out there Took another look and said
Found river beds, essentially I still treasure the hope That when their landing
is actually made That some little trace of life will be found Oh, we all do
Somebody will come to greet them on thoats Hmm? Someone will come to greet them
on thoats Certainly My hope, my hope for the, the Leigh Brackett Mars Or the Ray
Bradbury Mars Depends on, on remaking Mars Not on finding it that way It's a
fascinating idea If the, if the universe isn't the way you like it There's
always fantasy Today's science fiction is tomorrow's history
Man Earth The universe Tomorrow What's in store?